Investigating Code Quality from PR Data (#216)
ScottLogic/blog: _posts/2024-07-02-investigating-code-quality-from-pr-data.md

---
title: Investigating Code Quality from PR Data
date: 2024-07-02 00:00:00 Z
categories:
  - Artificial Intelligence
tags:
summary: Many of us are now using Generative AI to produce code, but what impact is this having on code quality? By analysing the data contained in PRs, our team has built a tool to investigate this.
author: alaws
---

When a developer wants to make changes to a code base, they raise a pull request (PR) which contains the proposed changes to the code and a written summary of the changes made. Other developers will then review this PR, leaving comments or suggestions, before ultimately deciding whether to approve the changes.

> PRs contain valuable data which can help us to get an insight into the process of writing code, and the teams involved. For example, we can use LLMs to analyse the tone of PR review comments - showing us the attitudes that reviewers have towards code.

Reviewer: Maybe  "..the attitude that reviewers have towards the proposed code changes."

### Enter LLMs

LLMs (Large Language Models), are noted for their ability to be able to interpret and generate human language, and this also extends to code. Although LLMs can write code, there are some common pain points that are characteristic of AI-generated code and may impact code quality. Things like not adhering to project conventions or not using functions that exist in other parts of the code base, are often clues that code may have been AI-generated.

These issues are likely to be noticed by reviewers. Therefore, what's written in comments is a valuable source of information. For example, what do reviewers frequently suggest needs to be changed? Is a developer frustrated to make this suggestion (perhaps they've made the same suggestion several times already)? Are developers generally polite to their colleagues, but harsher on code that they suspect is AI-generated? We can pass review comments, or even pieces of code, to an LLM and use them to start to answer these questions.

### Pulling this together into a tool

> Our team built a tool, to which we provide a GitHub or GitLab URL. It then scrapes the PRs that have been raised within that repository. We take the PR data and process it, to produce a range of different metrics which we can be classified as either deterministic or AI-powered. Our deterministic metrics use data such as the number of files changed, number of comments, requests for change, PR duration, and PR contributors. The AI-powered metrics use LLMs to analyse things like comment tone and subject, and to detect disagreements within comment threads.

Reviewer 2: *which we classify as

These metrics are then saved to a Parquet file, which can be exported to a [ClickHouse](https://clickhouse.com/clickhouse) database and imported into [Apache Superset](https://superset.apache.org/) to create a dashboard which allows us to visualise and explore the data captured.

To demonstrate our tool, we have used it to analyse 1000 PRs from four different repositories, namely [CPython](https://github.com/python/cpython), [Rust](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust), [OpenJDK](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk), and [TypeScript](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript). We've then produced some charts displaying a range of the metrics we produce, with the aim of gaining an insight into the development of these projects and the quality of code contained in the PRs.

##### PR Creation

![jpg]({{ site.github.url }}/alaws/assets/code-quality/code-quality-analysis-date-combined.jpg "Number of PRs opened per month")

> Our tool gathers the 1000 most recent PRs from each repository. For CPython and Rust, these were all created between May and June 2024. In contrast, with TypeScript, there has been a fairly consistent number of PRs opened each month since August 2023. Remarkably, in May 2024, there were 602 PRs opened in the CPython repository, and 623 opened in Rust, which shows us the speed at which these languages are developed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We configured our tool to pull the latest 1,000 PRs for each repository (as of DD/MM/YY). For CPython and Rust, these were all created between May and June 2024. In contrast, with TypeScript, there has been a fairly consistent number of PRs opened each month since August 2023. Remarkably, in May 2024, there were 602 PRs opened in the CPython repository, and 623 opened in Rust, which shows us the speed at which these languages are developed.
```

> We configured the tool to pull the latest 1,000 PRs for each repository (as of 17/06/24). For CPython and Rust, these were all created between May and June 2024. In contrast, with TypeScript, there has been a fairly consistent number of PRs opened each month since August 2023. Remarkably, in May 2024, there were 602 PRs opened in the CPython repository, and 623 opened in Rust, which shows us the speed at which these languages are developed.

Reviewer: maybe .."the speed at which these languages are evolving."

![jpg]({{ site.github.url }}/alaws/assets/code-quality/code-quality-analysis-day-pr-opened.jpg
"Percentage of PRs opened per day of the week")

The date and times that PRs were opened can give us an indication as to whether the developers working on these repositories are doing it as part of a job or as a hobby. However, this relies on the assumption that those who are contributing as part of their job are raising PRs during working hours, and those contributing as a hobby are more likely to be making contributions during weekends or evenings.

> Looking at the percentage of PRs that were opened on each day per repository, we can clearly see that across all the languages, there are fewer opened on weekends, suggesting that the majority of developers contributing to these repositories are doing so as part of a job. If this is the case, the developers working on OpenJDK must particularly enjoy a good work-life balance, as only 6% of their PRs were opened on weekends.

Reviewer 2: *must enjoy a particularly good work-life balance

> Looking at the percentage of PRs that were opened on each day per repository, we can clearly see that across all the languages, there are fewer opened on weekends, suggesting that the majority of developers contributing to these repositories are doing so as part of a job. If this is the case, the developers working on OpenJDK must particularly enjoy a particularly good work-life balance, as only 6% of their PRs were opened on weekends.

Reviewer 2: *If this is the case, the developers working on OpenJDK must enjoy a particularly good work-life balance, as only 6% of their PRs were opened on weekends.

(double particularly!)

![jpg]({{ site.github.url }}/alaws/assets/code-quality/code-quality-analysis-time-pr-opened.jpg "Percentage of PRs opened per hour of the day")

> Working on the assumption that developers are predominantly raising PRs during the working day, the times at which PRs are opened can give us an idea of the geographical distributions of the developers working on each repository. For example, we might expect that within a company, the team working on one project are co-located, so depending on time zones, the PRs are raised at specific times within the day.

Reviewer 2: *the team members working on one project are co-located

> Working on the assumption that developers are predominantly raising PRs during the working day, the times at which PRs are opened can give us an idea of the geographical distributions of the developers working on each repository. For example, we might expect that within a company, the team members working on one project are co-located, so depending on time zones, the PRs are raised at specific times within the day.

Reviewer: Not sure how secure this statement is, but I don't believe it adds much strength to your overall argument. Maybe consider 'same timezone' rather than co-located.

The above graph shows a rolling average of the percentage of PRs opened at each time, using a period of 3 hours. The graph produced from the Rust repository is flatter, suggesting that there is a more even geographical distribution of developers, compared to the other languages. CPython and OpenJDK seem to have some geographical distribution, with a modest concentration of their developers being based in America and Europe respectively. In contrast, Typescript seems to have a high concentration of developers based in America and Canada, which can be confirmed by exploring the [repository contributors](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/graphs/contributors).

##### PR Duration and Review Time

> ![jpg]({{ site.github.url }}/alaws/assets/code-quality/code-quality-analysis-pr-duration.jpg

Reviewer 3: I'm confused (and therefore assume readers would be) by the fact that the average total duration is less than the sum of the others and in some cases less than either of the others?
